The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.
The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.
The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.
The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.
The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.
The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.










The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.

The captain was terribly amazed, and even confounded, at this, believing
they would go on board the ship again and set sail, giving their comrades
over for lost, and so he should still lose the ship, which he was in
hopes we should have recovered; but he was quickly as much frightened the
other way.

They had not been long put off with the boat, when we perceived them all
coming on shore again; but with this new measure in their conduct, which
it seems they consulted together upon, viz. to leave three men in the
boat, and the rest to go on shore, and go up into the country to look for
their fellows.  This was a great disappointment to us, for now we were at
a loss what to do, as our seizing those seven men on shore would be no
advantage to us if we let the boat escape; because they would row away to
the ship, and then the rest of them would be sure to weigh and set sail,
and so our recovering the ship would be lost.  However we had no remedy
but to wait and see what the issue of things might present.  The seven
men came on shore, and the three who remained in the boat put her off to
a good distance from the shore, and came to an anchor to wait for them;
so that it was impossible for us to come at them in the boat.  Those that
came on shore kept close together, marching towards the top of the little
hill under which my habitation lay; and we could see them plainly, though
they could not perceive us.  We should have been very glad if they would
have come nearer us, so that we might have fired at them, or that they
would have gone farther off, that we might come abroad.  But when they
were come to the brow of the hill where they could see a great way into
the valleys and woods, which lay towards the north-east part, and where
the island lay lowest, they shouted and hallooed till they were weary;
and not caring, it seems, to venture far from the shore, nor far from one
another, they sat down together under a tree to consider it.  Had they
thought fit to have gone to sleep there, as the other part of them had
done, they had done the job for us; but they were too full of
apprehensions of danger to venture to go to sleep, though they could not
tell what the danger was they had to fear.

The captain made a very just proposal to me upon this consultation of
theirs, viz. that perhaps they would all fire a volley again, to
endeavour to make their fellows hear, and that we should all sally upon
them just at the juncture when their pieces were all discharged, and they
would certainly yield, and we should have them without bloodshed.  I
liked this proposal, provided it was done while we were near enough to
come up to them before they could load their pieces again.  But this
event did not happen; and we lay still a long time, very irresolute what
course to take.  At length I told them there would be nothing done, in my
opinion, till night; and then, if they did not return to the boat,
perhaps we might find a way to get between them and the shore, and so
might use some stratagem with them in the boat to get them on shore.  We
waited a great while, though very impatient for their removing; and were
very uneasy when, after long consultation, we saw them all start up and
march down towards the sea; it seems they had such dreadful apprehensions
of the danger of the place that they resolved to go on board the ship
again, give their companions over for lost, and so go on with their
intended voyage with the ship.

As soon as I perceived them go towards the shore, I imagined it to be as
it really was that they had given over their search, and were going back
again; and the captain, as soon as I told him my thoughts, was ready to
sink at the apprehensions of it; but I presently thought of a stratagem
to fetch them back again, and which answered my end to a tittle.  I
ordered Friday and the captainӳ mate to go over the little creek
westward, towards the place where the savages came on shore, when Friday
was rescued, and so soon as they came to a little rising round, at about
half a mile distant, I bid them halloo out, as loud as they could, and
wait till they found the seamen heard them; that as soon as ever they
heard the seamen answer them, they should return it again; and then,
keeping out of sight, take a round, always answering when the others
hallooed, to draw them as far into the island and among the woods as
possible, and then wheel about again to me by such ways as I directed
them.

They were just going into the boat when Friday and the mate hallooed; and
they presently heard them, and answering, ran along the shore westward,
towards the voice they heard, when they were stopped by the creek, where
the water being up, they could not get over, and called for the boat to
come up and set them over; as, indeed, I expected.  When they had set
themselves over, I observed that the boat being gone a good way into the
creek, and, as it were, in a harbour within the land, they took one of
the three men out of her, to go along with them, and left only two in the
boat, having fastened her to the stump of a little tree on the shore.
This was what I wished for; and immediately leaving Friday and the
captainӳ mate to their business, I took the rest with me; and, crossing
the creek out of their sight, we surprised the two men before they were
awareدne of them lying on the shore, and the other being in the boat.
The fellow on shore was between sleeping and waking, and going to start
up; the captain, who was foremost, ran in upon him, and knocked him down;
and then called out to him in the boat to yield, or he was a dead man.
They needed very few arguments to persuade a single man to yield, when he
saw five men upon him and his comrade knocked down: besides, this was, it
seems, one of the three who were not so hearty in the mutiny as the rest
of the crew, and therefore was easily persuaded not only to yield, but
afterwards to join very sincerely with us.  In the meantime, Friday and
the captainӳ mate so well managed their business with the rest that they
drew them, by hallooing and answering, from one hill to another, and from
one wood to another, till they not only heartily tired them, but left
them where they were, very sure they could not reach back to the boat
before it was dark; and, indeed, they were heartily tired themselves
also, by the time they came back to us.

We had nothing now to do but to watch for them in the dark, and to fall
upon them, so as to make sure work with them.  It was several hours after
Friday came back to me before they came back to their boat; and we could
hear the foremost of them, long before they came quite up, calling to
those behind to come along; and could also hear them answer, and complain
how lame and tired they were, and not able to come any faster: which was
very welcome news to us.  At length they came up to the boat: but it is
impossible to express their confusion when they found the boat fast
aground in the creek, the tide ebbed out, and their two men gone.  We
could hear them call one to another in a most lamentable manner, telling
one another they were got into an enchanted island; that either there
were inhabitants in it, and they should all be murdered, or else there
were devils and spirits in it, and they should be all carried away and
devoured.  They hallooed again, and called their two comrades by their
names a great many times; but no answer.  After some time we could see
them, by the little light there was, run about, wringing their hands like
men in despair, and sometimes they would go and sit down in the boat to
rest themselves: then come ashore again, and walk about again, and so the
same thing over again.  My men would fain have had me give them leave to
fall upon them at once in the dark; but I was willing to take them at
some advantage, so as to spare them, and kill as few of them as I could;
and especially I was unwilling to hazard the killing of any of our men,
knowing the others were very well armed.  I resolved to wait, to see if
they did not separate; and therefore, to make sure of them, I drew my
ambuscade nearer, and ordered Friday and the captain to creep upon their
hands and feet, as close to the ground as they could, that they might not
be discovered, and get as near them as they could possibly before they
offered to fire.

They had not been long in that posture when the boatswain, who was the
principal ringleader of the mutiny, and had now shown himself the most
dejected and dispirited of all the rest, came walking towards them, with
two more of the crew; the captain was so eager at having this principal
rogue so much in his power, that he could hardly have patience to let him
come so near as to be sure of him, for they only heard his tongue before:
but when they came nearer, the captain and Friday, starting up on their
feet, let fly at them.  The boatswain was killed upon the spot: the next
man was shot in the body, and fell just by him, though he did not die
till an hour or two after; and the third ran for it.  At the noise of the
fire I immediately advanced with my whole army, which was now eight men,
viz. myself, generalissimo; Friday, my lieutenant-general; the captain
and his two men, and the three prisoners of war whom we had trusted with
arms.  We came upon them, indeed, in the dark, so that they could not see
our number; and I made the man they had left in the boat, who was now one
of us, to call them by name, to try if I could bring them to a parley,
and so perhaps might reduce them to terms; which fell out just as we
desired: for indeed it was easy to think, as their condition then was,
they would be very willing to capitulate.  So he calls out as loud as he
could to one of them, Ԕom Smith!  Tom Smith!Ԡ Tom Smith answered
immediately, ԉs that Robinson?Ԡfor it seems he knew the voice.  The
other answered, ԁy, ay; for Godӳ sake, Tom Smith, throw down your arms
and yield, or you are all dead men this moment.Ԡ ԗho must we yield to?
Where are they?Ԡsays Smith again.  Ԉere they are,Ԡsays he; Ԩereӳ our
captain and fifty men with him, have been hunting you these two hours;
the boatswain is killed; Will Fry is wounded, and I am a prisoner; and if
you do not yield you are all lost.Ԡ ԗill they give us quarter, then?ԍ
says Tom Smith, ԡnd we will yield.Ԡ ԉӬl go and ask, if you promise to
yield,Ԡsaid Robinson: so he asked the captain, and the captain himself
then calls out, ԙou, Smith, you know my voice; if you lay down your arms
immediately and submit, you shall have your lives, all but Will Atkins.ԍ

Upon this Will Atkins cried out, Ԇor Godӳ sake, captain, give me
quarter; what have I done?  They have all been as bad as I:Ԡwhich, by
the way, was not true; for it seems this Will Atkins was the first man
that laid hold of the captain when they first mutinied, and used him
barbarously in tying his hands and giving him injurious language.
However, the captain told him he must lay down his arms at discretion,
and trust to the governorӳ mercy: by which he meant me, for they all
called me governor.  In a word, they all laid down their arms and begged
their lives; and I sent the man that had parleyed with them, and two
more, who bound them all; and then my great army of fifty men, which,
with those three, were in all but eight, came up and seized upon them,
and upon their boat; only that I kept myself and one more out of sight
for reasons of state.

Our next work was to repair the boat, and think of seizing the ship: and
as for the captain, now he had leisure to parley with them, he
expostulated with them upon the villainy of their practices with him, and
upon the further wickedness of their design, and how certainly it must
bring them to misery and distress in the end, and perhaps to the gallows.
They all appeared very penitent, and begged hard for their lives.  As for
that, he told them they were not his prisoners, but the commanderӳ of
the island; that they thought they had set him on shore in a barren,
uninhabited island; but it had pleased God so to direct them that it was
inhabited, and that the governor was an Englishman; that he might hang
them all there, if he pleased; but as he had given them all quarter, he
supposed he would send them to England, to be dealt with there as justice
required, except Atkins, whom he was commanded by the governor to advise
to prepare for death, for that he would be hanged in the morning.

Though this was all but a fiction of his own, yet it had its desired
effect; Atkins fell upon his knees to beg the captain to intercede with
the governor for his life; and all the rest begged of him, for Godӳ
sake, that they might not be sent to England.

It now occurred to me that the time of our deliverance was come, and that
it would be a most easy thing to bring these fellows in to be hearty in
getting possession of the ship; so I retired in the dark from them, that
they might not see what kind of a governor they had, and called the
captain to me; when I called, at a good distance, one of the men was
ordered to speak again, and say to the captain, ԃaptain, the commander
calls for you;Ԡand presently the captain replied, Ԕell his excellency I
am just coming.Ԡ This more perfectly amazed them, and they all believed
that the commander was just by, with his fifty men.  Upon the captain
coming to me, I told him my project for seizing the ship, which he liked
wonderfully well, and resolved to put it in execution the next morning.
But, in order to execute it with more art, and to be secure of success, I
told him we must divide the prisoners, and that he should go and take
Atkins, and two more of the worst of them, and send them pinioned to the
cave where the others lay.  This was committed to Friday and the two men
who came on shore with the captain.  They conveyed them to the cave as to
a prison: and it was, indeed, a dismal place, especially to men in their
condition.  The others I ordered to my bower, as I called it, of which I
have given a full description: and as it was fenced in, and they
pinioned, the place was secure enough, considering they were upon their
behaviour.

To these in the morning I sent the captain, who was to enter into a
parley with them; in a word, to try them, and tell me whether he thought
they might be trusted or not to go on board and surprise the ship.  He
talked to them of the injury done him, of the condition they were brought
to, and that though the governor had given them quarter for their lives
as to the present action, yet that if they were sent to England they
would all be hanged in chains; but that if they would join in so just an
attempt as to recover the ship, he would have the governorӳ engagement
for their pardon.

Any one may guess how readily such a proposal would be accepted by men in
their condition; they fell down on their knees to the captain, and
promised, with the deepest imprecations, that they would be faithful to
him to the last drop, and that they should owe their lives to him, and
would go with him all over the world; that they would own him as a father
to them as long as they lived.  ԗell,Ԡsays the captain, ԉ must go and
tell the governor what you say, and see what I can do to bring him to
consent to it.Ԡ So he brought me an account of the temper he found them
in, and that he verily believed they would be faithful.  However, that we
might be very secure, I told him he should go back again and choose out
those five, and tell them, that they might see he did not want men, that
he would take out those five to be his assistants, and that the governor
would keep the other two, and the three that were sent prisoners to the
castle (my cave), as hostages for the fidelity of those five; and that if
they proved unfaithful in the execution, the five hostages should be
hanged in chains alive on the shore.  This looked severe, and convinced
them that the governor was in earnest; however, they had no way left them
but to accept it; and it was now the business of the prisoners, as much
as of the captain, to persuade the other five to do their duty.

Our strength was now thus ordered for the expedition: first, the captain,
his mate, and passenger; second, the two prisoners of the first gang, to
whom, having their character from the captain, I had given their liberty,
and trusted them with arms; third, the other two that I had kept till now
in my bower, pinioned, but on the captainӳ motion had now released;
fourth, these five released at last; so that there were twelve in all,
besides five we kept prisoners in the cave for hostages.

I asked the captain if he was willing to venture with these hands on
board the ship; but as for me and my man Friday, I did not think it was
proper for us to stir, having seven men left behind; and it was
employment enough for us to keep them asunder, and supply them with
victuals.  As to the five in the cave, I resolved to keep them fast, but
Friday went in twice a day to them, to supply them with necessaries; and
I made the other two carry provisions to a certain distance, where Friday
was to take them.

When I showed myself to the two hostages, it was with the captain, who
told them I was the person the governor had ordered to look after them;
and that it was the governorӳ pleasure they should not stir anywhere but
by my direction; that if they did, they would be fetched into the castle,
and be laid in irons: so that as we never suffered them to see me as
governor, I now appeared as another person, and spoke of the governor,
the garrison, the castle, and the like, upon all occasions.

The captain now had no difficulty before him, but to furnish his two
boats, stop the breach of one, and man them.  He made his passenger
captain of one, with four of the men; and himself, his mate, and five
more, went in the other; and they contrived their business very well, for
they came up to the ship about midnight.  As soon as they came within
call of the ship, he made Robinson hail them, and tell them they had
brought off the men and the boat, but that it was a long time before they
had found them, and the like, holding them in a chat till they came to
the shipӳ side; when the captain and the mate entering first with their
arms, immediately knocked down the second mate and carpenter with the
butt-end of their muskets, being very faithfully seconded by their men;
they secured all the rest that were upon the main and quarter decks, and
began to fasten the hatches, to keep them down that were below; when the
other boat and their men, entering at the forechains, secured the
forecastle of the ship, and the scuttle which went down into the
cook-room, making three men they found there prisoners.  When this was
done, and all safe upon deck, the captain ordered the mate, with three
men, to break into the round-house, where the new rebel captain lay, who,
having taken the alarm, had got up, and with two men and a boy had got
firearms in their hands; and when the mate, with a crow, split open the
door, the new captain and his men fired boldly among them, and wounded
the mate with a musket ball, which broke his arm, and wounded two more of
the men, but killed nobody.  The mate, calling for help, rushed, however,
into the round-house, wounded as he was, and, with his pistol, shot the
new captain through the head, the bullet entering at his mouth, and came
out again behind one of his ears, so that he never spoke a word more:
upon which the rest yielded, and the ship was taken effectually, without
any more lives lost.

As soon as the ship was thus secured, the captain ordered seven guns to
be fired, which was the signal agreed upon with me to give me notice of
his success, which, you may be sure, I was very glad to hear, having sat
watching upon the shore for it till near two oӣlock in the morning.
Having thus heard the signal plainly, I laid me down; and it having been
a day of great fatigue to me, I slept very sound, till I was surprised
with the noise of a gun; and presently starting up, I heard a man call me
by the name of ԇovernor!  Governor!Ԡand presently I knew the captainӳ
voice; when, climbing up to the top of the hill, there he stood, and,
pointing to the ship, he embraced me in his arms, ԍy dear friend and
deliverer,Ԡsays he, Դhereӳ your ship; for she is all yours, and so are
we, and all that belong to her.Ԡ I cast my eyes to the ship, and there
she rode, within little more than half a mile of the shore; for they had
weighed her anchor as soon as they were masters of her, and, the weather
being fair, had brought her to an anchor just against the mouth of the
little creek; and the tide being up, the captain had brought the pinnace
in near the place where I had first landed my rafts, and so landed just
at my door.  I was at first ready to sink down with the surprise; for I
saw my deliverance, indeed, visibly put into my hands, all things easy,
and a large ship just ready to carry me away whither I pleased to go.  At
first, for some time, I was not able to answer him one word; but as he
had taken me in his arms I held fast by him, or I should have fallen to
the ground.  He perceived the surprise, and immediately pulled a bottle
out of his pocket and gave me a dram of cordial, which he had brought on
purpose for me.  After I had drunk it, I sat down upon the ground; and
though it brought me to myself, yet it was a good while before I could
speak a word to him.  All this time the poor man was in as great an
ecstasy as I, only not under any surprise as I was; and he said a
thousand kind and tender things to me, to compose and bring me to myself;
but such was the flood of joy in my breast, that it put all my spirits
into confusion: at last it broke out into tears, and in a little while
after I recovered my speech; I then took my turn, and embraced him as my
deliverer, and we rejoiced together.  I told him I looked upon him as a
man sent by Heaven to deliver me, and that the whole transaction seemed
to be a chain of wonders; that such things as these were the testimonies
we had of a secret hand of Providence governing the world, and an
evidence that the eye of an infinite Power could search into the remotest
corner of the world, and send help to the miserable whenever He pleased.
I forgot not to lift up my heart in thankfulness to Heaven; and what
heart could forbear to bless Him, who had not only in a miraculous manner
provided for me in such a wilderness, and in such a desolate condition,
but from whom every deliverance must always be acknowledged to proceed.

When we had talked a while, the captain told me he had brought me some
little refreshment, such as the ship afforded, and such as the wretches
that had been so long his masters had not plundered him of.  Upon this,
he called aloud to the boat, and bade his men bring the things ashore
that were for the governor; and, indeed, it was a present as if I had
been one that was not to be carried away with them, but as if I had been
to dwell upon the island still.  First, he had brought me a case of
bottles full of excellent cordial waters, six large bottles of Madeira
wine (the bottles held two quarts each), two pounds of excellent good
tobacco, twelve good pieces of the shipӳ beef, and six pieces of pork,
with a bag of peas, and about a hundred-weight of biscuit; he also
brought me a box of sugar, a box of flour, a bag full of lemons, and two
bottles of lime-juice, and abundance of other things.  But besides these,
and what was a thousand times more useful to me, he brought me six new
clean shirts, six very good neckcloths, two pair of gloves, one pair of
shoes, a hat, and one pair of stockings, with a very good suit of clothes
of his own, which had been worn but very little: in a word, he clothed me
from head to foot.  It was a very kind and agreeable present, as any one
may imagine, to one in my circumstances, but never was anything in the
world of that kind so unpleasant, awkward, and uneasy as it was to me to
wear such clothes at first.






































































































































































































